src: https://www.viator.com/Lisbon-attractions/Belem-Tower-Torre-de-Belem/d538-a805?pid=P00163275&mcid=42383&medium=link&campaign=portugal-castles

1- 
National Palace of Pena

The National Palace of Pena is the most famous castle in Portugal due to its colourful appearance and imposing location atop the highest hill above Sintra. It’s a monument of national and international importance and a Unesco World Heritage site. The story of the palace dates back to the Middle Ages when a chapel dedicated to the Lady of Pena was established. It eventually grew into a monastery and then a castle. The building’s facade is outstanding, borrowing elaborate details from the Manueline and Moorish styles of architecture. The clever design of the palace ensures that it’s visible from anywhere in the surrounding gardens and forests.
-----
2 -
Belém Tower
The 16th-century Belém Tower is adorned with the symbols of the house of King Manuel I, including the thick rope that encircles the castle and terminates in elegant nodes and crosses at different angles. In the late 16th century, the tower became a prison during the Spanish invasion of Portugal, holding upper-class criminals and political dissidents in the dungeons. Belém Tower protected the Portuguese capital, which was vulnerable to attacks from pirates and neighbouring states. Today, it’s a key symbol of Lisbon and serves as a reminder of the former power of the Portuguese on land and at sea.
---
3. Castle of the Moors
The Castle of the Moors was built during the eighth and ninth centuries, making it one of the oldest preserved fortresses in Portugal. This Moorish fort sits atop a steep hill in the middle of a thick forest and is surrounded by a high wall. The castle was altered to survive long sieges, with a reservoir for drinking water built inside. However, despite its vital geographical location, the fortress was abandoned by its inhabitants in the 15th century and quickly lost value and started to decay. Today, climb to the top for impressive views of the beautiful valleys that stretch towards the Atlantic Ocean.

------
4- Guimarães Castle

Guimarães Castle is one of the most important Medieval fortresses in northern Portugal. Its walls were built in the shape of a pentagram, complete with eight rectangular crenellated towers. Constructed in the 10th century, it later became the official royal residence of Henry of Burgundy, Count of Portugal, the father of the first king of Portugal, Afonso Henriques. The castle withstood the Battle of São Mamede in 1128, which resulted in the victory of Afonso and signified the starting point of an independent Portugal. Since then, the castle has been dubbed the birthplace of the Portuguese nation.

-----
5. Almourol Castle

On the top of a small rocky island in the middle of the Tagus River, this sandstone castle is one of the most picturesque fortresses in the country. It dates back to the 12th century, and despite its respectable age, the Almourol Castle is in good condition. The isle has long been a strategically important point, controlling the waterway along the Tagus, and it’s widely accepted that its name comes from the Arabic word almorolan, which means “high rock”. Indeed, this definition perfectly describes the location of the castle.
-----------------------------------------------